there are nearly 200 types of dwarfism
and the smallest most proportionate
Dwarfs are called primordial
his arms were like my fingers they I
mean just the proportion itself I mean
you're you're looking at this child but
everything is just miniaturized his toes
and you're like how can toes be this
little
[Music]
questions I asked the doctor were can
she have a baby
you know little girl things that all
girls want to know and they said to me
with the size that she'll continue to
stay if she would get pregnant it would
probably kill her
you do the school is it all right
nothing yeah heart
[Music]
can you make a piggy noise
you do can you make a horse noise
good dog noise can you make a dog noise
you make a Cowboys
[Music]
[Applause]
sixteen years old 10 years old 16 pounds
and a little bit over two feet Bree is
one of the smallest primordial Dwarfs in
the world
Michael primordial her heart lungs and
other organs are completely
proportionate inside her tiny body she
was delivered at 33 weeks by c-section
just a miniature little person a pound
in 12 ounces 800 grams and 12 and a half
inches long they really lean towards
putting her in an institution and not
bringing her home why did you not think
that that was the right thing to do I
was her mother and I loved her
regardless regardless of how sick she
was or what she could or couldn't do and
I still didn't feel like they knew
everything
[Music]
primordial means fundamental existing at
or from the beginning
primordial Dwarfs are so rare that most
doctors have never seen one in their
lifetime
no one knows what recessive gene or
chromosome causes the syndrome its
origins are predestined from the first
moments in the womb but consequently
they are born and often live shrouded in
mystery
what's it like to be a little person do
you ever wish you were a little bit
taller primordial Dwarfs are
characterized by severely restricted
growth proportionate limbs and
high-pitched squeaky voices most died by
the time they are 30 there is no cure
and rarely do they grow beyond three
foot six inches my family all were
certain that she would get bigger they
were in denial that she was going to
stay small and that should be little
forever I mean they believed that
eventually she'd catch up she may be
smaller than most people that she would
catch up to a normal height but how did
you feel at this moment in your life
pretty isolated and overwhelmed you feel
like you failed you know and you're
trying to pick that up you know you're
trying to make the best of something
that you're not sure what that is I
suppose when we have our babies were
prime for perfection only society is
[Music]
for the family they are born into the
questions of many how did this happen
what problems will they face medically
and socially can they have children and
how long will they live
the answers that the doctors give is
that they just don't know
[Applause]
lovely to see you
yes this is Steve hi Heidi
good meeting and this is Mark okay
thanks
how was your day at school the first
time I ever heard
dwarf mentioned was when he was eight
months old and that was after they did I
had him hospitalized for a week the
pediatrician said well we've got to
figure out what's going on here
and they did chromosome Studies on him
and hormone studies on him and
everything and everything pretty much
came out normal and they said the words
they use this this is his constitution
this is the way he's meant to be he's a
dwarf and I can remember not even being
able to say the word I used to practice
at home dwarf dwarfism he's a dwarf
because I couldn't say it I could not
say it I said this is so I remember
trying to tell my in-laws and my family
and friends you know well he said dwarf
and I could not get the words out
because all I could think of as Snow
White in the Seven Dwarfs that's all
kyle is Danny's best friend
[Music]
at 14 he's two years younger than Danny
that's a hard thing to do
everyone started no one can ever do that
I mean that takes late incredible upper
bodies things because I've been climbing
so many like times oh no oh no up and
down for my entire father kind of up
games get what I want
what about when he was say five to nine
what were the challenges that he was
fearless
you know you would come into the kitchen
and literally he would be on top of the
refrigerator oh yeah get something and
you'd be like dad what are you doing
well how did you get up there in the
first place and you know you know get
down
after a while we kind of got used to it
and it wasn't but then we'd go to school
and these teachers would be like oh he's
climbing the bookcases yeah yeah see
that's what always scared me is remember
the time he did the bureau upstairs he
other him and Katie yeah and they pulled
it pulled the drawers out and then
trying to walk up like its steps and the
drawer the whole bureau started to come
over and you think well if it had come
over on him that might be it primordial
Dwarfs are often not diagnosed until
they're five years old until then many
of them will have received growth
hormone in the mistaken belief that this
will make them taller does it harm him
to put growth hormone into him well
there can certainly be side effects to
growth hormone so you could get enlarged
hearts heart muscles and things like
that I mean so why even take a chance
why go down that road I mean and I'll
tell you it was very disappointed I had
to give him a needle every day you know
that's when you cry when you would cry
cry baby cry
please don't give it please don't do
don't do it don't I don't want an allow
on it and then you'd have to give it to
him anyway it is horrible the growth
hormone had no effect on Danny you know
it was such a trial by error there we
got absolutely conflicting opinions on
what they thought and that's again part
of the genesis of me realizing these
people don't know everything you know
they're not God they're not not that
they're bad people but you know they're
offering their opinion doesn't mean make
it true
[Music]
we had actually been told that you had a
20% chance of having another child that
would be affected in any kind of a
genetic disorder but when I got pregnant
with Bradley Bridget wasn't officially
diagnosed with the dwarfism that she has
you pray for him to be big and you pray
for him to be little because if they're
little then Bridget has someone to be
with and if they're big then their their
lives are so much easier so it's like a
double-edged sword
what's it like being a primordial dwarf
Oh keep it on very well with your sister
breathe no she seems very sweet
is he much stronger than you do you feel
responsible for him so when you walk
along with him what are you thinking
[Music]
how are you feeling today dad
why is that not all right is it because
we're here did you have a good day at
school what happened at school yep then
when she comes home on the bus crying
because somebody called her a baby or a
suppose friend will say you're too small
to do that you can't do that those are
really the hard things and then we just
have to sit in and hug and you know it's
gonna be okay huh
when Hannah was adopted by Jackie at
four months she had been labeled as a
failure to thrive baby
at two years she weighed just nine
pounds but for years she was diagnosed
as a primordial dwarf I felt alone I
didn't know that there was over 200
types of dwarfism Zoar what's gonna
happen with the particular syndrome that
she had I really just felt alone
although I had loved ones around me I
had my husband my family I still felt
incredibly alone because I'm her mom and
I don't know what I'm dealing with
zahana we were saying you were telling
us tell us how tall you are nothing
you're nothing why do you say you're
nothing nothing
she knows she's different yes you know
on her tenth birthday we had her
birthday party down at the Country Inn
and it was a poolside and I invited ten
little girls of her friends from school
or nine of them she'd be the tenth one
and what I saw was all the average-sized
children in the pool all about the same
height in a circle and Hannah knew she
couldn't be there because she'd be
underwater so she would sit out when the
other children were doing the activities
that normal ten-year-old kids did and it
broke my heart
do you take a peek show us your teeth
what do you think about your teeth oh
there are a lot of times where she'll
say I want to be tall like my friends
and then I would just say this is the
way you're going to be you're gonna be
small and you know that's gonna be life
for you it's gonna be hard a lot of
times for a lot of things but what do
you say
[Music]
[Applause]
turn as much as you can you know this
way god I wish you just talked with
[Music]
but primordial Dwarfs the transition to
independence as an adult has to be taken
step-by-step what do you think you'll be
doing in the next few years
hopefully finishing my college degree
driving of course getting a license and
you know getting a job I've only had
maybe two people out of the whole time
I've known her think that she was my
daughter and that was one person that
was walking in the store and then there
was a lady at a restaurant so they say
tea well the lady at the restaurant we
told Kristin that she was my daughter
cuz kids ate for free that day money so
we just decided to tell it was her idea
though it wasn't mine it was her idea
which I was really surprised so Kristin
if you have to pretend to be a kid how
old do you say you are when they look at
me sometimes they think I'm like six or
seven years old maybe you know cuz
that's your normal height for like damn
or or like a three or four year old
sometimes Kristin's older brother Kevin
was also a primordial dwarf he died
eighteen months ago what did your
brother dial aneurysm a brain oh yeah
and how old was he hmm
actually I thought our house was haunted
like a couple days after he died I
thought I was being watched and every
time I'd fall asleep
on one way I feel somebody tugging on my
blanket and I would always hear music
coming from next door and could see an
apparition or something running up the
stairs and so we really thought that our
house was haunted watching miss most
about him just the essence of him he
went as old as he was he would come up
to me and say he'd say come here MA and
he put his arms up and he'd give me a
hug he says we both need a hug or he
needs a hug or I need a hug
he was never embarrassed to do that and
the night he died he gave me a backrub
Kristen found him on the sidewalk he was
like looking at the Stars can I leaning
back looking at the Stars and I thought
he was playing a prank on me because he
does that now and again and when I found
him he wasn't breathing
we knew we could get him to emergency
quicker than calling 9-1-1 so I drove
Mike held him and I ran in with him and
then they had to put him into a
medically induced coma he had beautiful
eyes those eyes would say why didn't you
let me go twice I said to him if what
you see is better than what you have
here on earth
I'll let you go and we turned the
Machine off and he was gone within what
20 seconds 25 seconds
one third of primordial Dwarfs died at
birth one third in their childhood and
the rest rarely live longer than their
late twenties how is Kristen without him
I don't know she right now things he's
haunted the house did she tell you
because all of a sudden this kid who
never who used to love to sleep in the
dark the darker it could be the better
she liked it sleeping with a lay down in
her bedroom I said honey if he's back
because his spirits in the house I used
it back to hurt you are you worried
about Kristen yeah
[Music]
being a child is safe and growing up is
risky and you know you you saw Dan's
room he has stuffed animals on his bed
he has you know twice around that you
would say were more age-appropriate to
someone who's between the ages of six
and nine let's say then for someone
who's 16 and a lot of that is that it's
safe it's safe to be six years old it's
safe to not grow up
[Applause]
do you think he'll still be living with
you when he's 25 30 30
I don't know 25 I would say almost
certainly you know I think there will
come a day when Dan wants independence
well yeah I mean you can never say never
I mean I know at some point I think he's
going to death 25 I would bet yes 30 I
think now we're talking about the point
where he may decide that he wants to
give it a try on his own
[Music]
he's already gone through the boys his
own age and they have in fact kind of
peeled off so now he hangs with a bunch
of boys who were two years younger than
him what happens when they hit 1718 and
they want to go on to other things you
know I mean Dan can't keep hanging out
with 14 year old kids until he's 30
[Music]
the United States to the Republic for
which it stands one nation when I first
met him he was like the size of like Tom
Thumb my job is to make sure that he
gets on and off the bus safely and I
make sure that like he doesn't get
trampled and he's safe during the day
Danny's Constitution is such that his
body has to work much harder and he
tires easily every morning at school
he's allowed a one-hour nap when he went
to grammar school I remember in the
middle school well you saw him get off
the bus he couldn't even get on the bus
we used to have to pick him up and put
him on the bus so I've known him for
some time you know he's got a walk twice
as fast as everybody but everybody
acknowledges him they need they see him
he gets along with everyone everyone
loves him he can to be fresh he can
thing get mad just like anyone else and
what's just kind of hard to get mad at
him because when he does get mad he's
pretty funny good temper he has a temper
you got in trouble the other day you
just got suspended so yeah for a
swearing at a teacher
we're gonna wake him up anyway cuz it's
time for him to get up okay if he's not
snoring daddy Danny goes to the canteen
ahead of his classmates to avoid being
crushed
I hear you got into trouble yesterday
did you have a suspension yeah what's
that for
and then I'm flowing in hmm I have my
mouth once you let your mouth run what
did you say
all right get another one is a guy
that's a bad word
can't say you said a bad word about
somebody what your aide and she makes
you mad fellows so what did you say
Danny I didn't mind a shout no but
Jordan yes so she heard you and she
reported you yeah now why did you say
that yes you're annoying
she noising would you like to be more
independent James yeah do you need her
yes though and you do you feel a bit
trapped yeah cuz she kind of needs her
book you'd like it to be a long way away
yeah
[Music]
certainly the one thing that's the
toughest part of it to handle is
thinking about the things that he's
gonna have to go through later you know
there's going to be a day when Dan you
know wakes up in the morning and
probably says to himself you know where
am I gonna find a wife or a girlfriend
or someone to marry and just thinking
about that him having to go through that
is that's tough
[Music]
now watch your lips be when you grow up
a basketball approach you want to be a
basketball coach for our homes do you
think you'll be able to do that
do not need to be terribly how many kids
would you like to and have they both
been through puberty both of them mm-hmm
yes
yes so that was a experience in itself
families isn't so bad boys I there's so
much he's here beverage so this is a
very interesting and she was probably
better prepared than the adults she know
that she would have a period she did she
was a she knew should have a period
she's very prepared in that aspect and
she knew that you know she'd be crabby
and all of that
how old was Bridget when she was just 15
she actually has to have enough body fat
now we plateaued at that 27 and a half
inches and she put on three more
pounds so I guess that was just enough
body fat to send her over to be able to
have a menses so let's start at the
beginning
who will you marry in order to have your
kids a regular guy a tall guy or a short
guy meaning well now do you think you'll
find him in your hometown
[Music]
no primordial dwarf has ever got
pregnant or fathered a child none has
ever got married there's no research to
prove whether their babies will be
primordial dwarfs or of average size and
doctors fear that delivering the baby
would be fatal
[Music]
how tall were your parents my middle
name say - seven - seven in the hair and
then saddle ritsuo yes yes thanks a door
is ranked a most primordial don't reach
the age of 30 but Sharon has managed to
get to the remarkable age of 43 and is
the oldest primordial dwarf in the USA
Sharon was born into an isolated farming
community in Illinois in 1961 she wasn't
diagnosed for many years and didn't
attend school the authorities claiming
she would slide off the school bus seats
I'll spray my stick man goons and then
the case men gave its crew during the
daytime and who is Linda Linda is my
half-sister and kick she's my sister and
the hair Rob is only eight and a half
but I was excited and happy I wanted a
little brother or sister
of course I wasn't for sure about
wanting one that tiny but was like
having a doll and I pushed around in my
in a carriage it was a unique experience
how long did you add doll's clothes for
public an extremophile our mother was a
very beautiful woman inside and out
and the hard worker I credit her with
Sharon's survival what was life like for
you as a teenager he can't die no asking
anything opening
don't raise and to come now I know price
again soon okay fifteen sixteen they
could drive Gabe drive bang things and
so it
I suppose it is no Nina in that respect
[Music]
yes I envy her she's not a nervous
person and I'm very nervous she doesn't
get upset over hardly anything and I I
can get upset but she has a good outlook
on life and she always sees and other
people the good thing
[Music]
hannah is going through little early
puberty things now and sometimes she'll
say that she doesn't like being who she
is she doesn't like being tiny she wants
to be like her friends so she can hold
their hands and run and ride the same
sized bike and do all the things that
they're doing the families of primordial
Dwarfs are often very isolated and they
use the internet to communicate jackie
is taking hannah to meet sharon to help
her feel more positive about her life as
a very small person
Sharon's probably feeling good about
herself and she's been through so much I
need to know things like you know you
seem like you really like yourself that
you're really happy with yourself when
did that change how do you get to that
point
[Music]
[Applause]
yes she is very tiny she's a primordial
dwarf and they are the tiniest dorks in
the world that are proportioned there's
only a handful of panis type in the
world
[Music]
these kids are in this this huge world
and this huge world is not going to
shrink for them so they have to adapt
somehow to this world but how can you
live like that how can you be happy that
way
[Music]
the meeting is important for Sharon -
it's been five years since she's seen
another primordial dwarf like herself by
favors just and the ndrangheta deuce is
mylne missing I think this is my
interview that's not anything here and
sometimes this one guys at work sounds
Thank You Pierre thanks Tamara and Erica
sometimes she'll lick your nose but she
doesn't look your cheek or anything but
she's kind of hot what's it like to see
Hannah it's almost like seeing my sister
when she was Hannah's age same blonde
hair same voice take you back yeah it
does it really does I just want a scoop
Hannah up and hug her though she's got
larger arms than what Sharon said
Sharon's guys had smaller arms
I call him toothpick arms they were so
skinny slowly Hannah's a little bit
bigger that way you're just yeah yeah
and she's an adult so you have a little
room to grow you were gonna ask Sharon a
question what were you gonna ask her
nice days mmm don't have a Sunday sleep
something goes wrong I want so badly for
Hannah to be normal to be like everybody
else and is that wrong to want so much
just like with my other children I want
them to do everything this world has to
offer do you think she'll be able to
achieve that yes I do and I'm gonna keep
saying that because I just really
believe in being positive and positive
words have to come out she has to hear
all the positive that's out there if I
can't give that to her she will have
nothing and she'll have nothing to fall
back on her no memory you know where
that goes around and round the tape
recorder in your head she won't have
that unless we keep saying to her you
can you can
you can
do you think you're facing the toughest
years now all I know or you are yeah
from here on out I think it probably
gets tougher from now till probably you
know coming up to 30 is going to be very
difficult people grow into adulthood you
get a lot of self-worth from working and
owning your you know earning your own
money and it's very very important and
we want to let him experience that but
it's also the you know this is the time
when you disengage from your parents
right hell up your own relationships and
I just don't know it's gonna go for him
right last Christmas Danny went to his
first dance
that's Desiree what did it feel like to
go out with Desiree thank you going
ahead sorry you know he was my little
boy because I asked another girl and she
couldn't go and Desiree came up to me
say oh I'll go with you
she's a junior so you better hand me
that one of the happiest days of your
life yeah what does that make you feel
happy no cuz I actually went out with
someone who appreciated that I'm and
same as everyone else the first time you
go ask me out and first time go so that
you know she could go out with me really
happy
do you think you'll go out with her
again I don't know no there are the
things is another dance people who grow
up with completely normal lives are can
be devastated if somebody they love
leaves them or if somebody does
something that hurts them or if they
don't get something that they've been
dreaming about all their life so you
know what what you have with Dan is you
have a certainty that that
going to happen there's there's almost a
certainty that at some point in his life
he's going to be very disappointed in
love he's going to be told that there's
some goal that he wants to achieve that
he's simply not going to be able to
achieve because of the way he was born
so at some point it's gonna hi now some
of the friends will start you know
drinking or going out nights and you
know he'll want to stay out till two
o'clock in the morning or you know why
not I why can't I everyone else who's 18
or 19 does it you know and what do you
say you say I'm doing it with both hands
it's cut push and pull I mean one
statistic that scares the heck out of me
is the suicide rate among male Dwarfs
over the age of 18 it's high it's about
lack of power lack of control and men
are so wrapped up in that and it's four
ways oh it's treat that down
Christie's marriage ended in divorce
soon after Bradley was born it was such
a hard time in my life you know and and
still you you look back and wonder if
you did everything like you should have
what could you run differently I I don't
think that I probably could have but you
still struggle with that you still
struggle but it's the everyday struggles
I think that they're probably the heart
of it and I think that's because it's
ongoing so I'll probably in ten years
look back and think the same thing you
know
you think he'll get mad I don't know I
you know in a perfect world I would find
Hannah and him would get along perfectly
and they'd be perfectly matched and they
could live in the little apartment above
her and be safe and live a productive
life and everything I started thinking
about that when he was born I was sure
and then I was like scale back Monica
just think about tomorrow preschool
don't think about
[Music]
Danny is now at high school taking his
senior exams
[Music]
do you think you'll live a long life I
don't know I'm sorry
and that's Sean how long I live but I'll
make you wait all right Ken yeah nothing
like just giving you any idea how long
you might live no gay or no I don't
think anyone really knows how long how
long would you like to live I don't know
what sounds like a good age
and you said cemani I think for me yeah
just like the rest of us yes
[Music]
[Applause]